Design proposal to support OS and Instance CVEs tracking (#314)
open-edge-platform/edge-manageability-framework: design-proposals/edge-infra-cve-tracking.md

> # Design Proposal: CVE Tracking for OS Profile and Edge Nodes

Reviewer: @krishnajs has a good point that we shoudl define what CVE info we expect and want to show 
We should add a section and include the following elements that I think are worth showing for a CVE:
CVE ID
Link to CVE description/impact 
Priority 
Affected packages

Author: Done, please take a look.

Author(s): Daniele Moro

Last updated: 2025-05-08

## Abstract

This proposal describes a mechanism for tracking CVEs (Common Vulnerabilities
and Exposures) for OS Profiles and Edge Nodes in the Edge Infrastructure Manager
(EIM).

## Proposal

Currently, we have no mechanisms to track CVEs related to the OS in Edge
Infrastructure Manager. Ideally, we should have a mechanism to track that a
certain version of the OS is affected by a certain CVE, and that a set of Edge
Nodes are affected too. Also, the user of EIM should be aware of this, and it
should be provided with information about which version of the OS fixed the
given CVE. Users of EIM should be also able to see both forward and backward
list of fixed CVEs. In order to understand the effect on CVEs on updates.

Requirements:
- Report existing CVEs for a given OS Profile version
- Report fixed CVEs on a given OS Profile version
- Report list of CVEs that affect an Instance at runtime
- Do backward and forward fixed CVEs tracking between OSProfile versions

The proposal is to extend both the OS Profile and the Instance resources to
contain information about CVEs.

**OS Profile**:

> - `existing_cves`: a list of CVEs that affect the given OS Profile version. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `existing_cves`: a list of CVEs that affect the OS image and packages included in that OS Profile version. This
```

  is filled from information provided by the OS vendor.

> - `fixed_cves`: a list of CVEs that was fixed in the given OS Profile Version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `fixed_cves`: a list of CVEs that was fixed in the given OS and packages included in that OS Profile Version.
```

  This is filled from information provided by the OS vendor.

**Instance**:

> - `cves`: a list of CVEs that affects the given Instance at runtime. The

Reviewer: maybe for consistency we call them `existing_cves` here as well ? I'm pondering what is the best approach.

  information on this field comes from the Edge Node itself. For Immutable OSes
  this should contain the same values as the `affected_cves` from the
  `current_os` OS Profile.

Since we support both Immutable OSes, in particular the Edge Microvisor Toolkit
(EMT), and mutable OSes, in particular Ubuntu, we need to design support for CVE
reporting for both OSes. Unfortunately, there is no standard way to publish CVEs
report, so this feature needs to be designed and implemented on a per-OS basis.

### OS Profile

For the OS profile, for both `affected_cves` and `fixed_cves` we expect support
from the OS Vendor or Provider to provide these information.

> 

Reviewer: I'd maybe go the direction of defining the model that we want internally for the CVEs (see comment at the beginning) and then mention here that we will import CVes from different sources into that model.

https://cloud.google.com/container-optimized-os/docs/release-notes/m121. OS
Resource Manager (OSRM) can populate information about the fixed CVEs when
creating the OSProfile. For existing CVEs instead it must periodically query the
Release Service to get the published file, and fill those information into the
OSProfile.

For Ubuntu, instead, there are multiple ways to get these information:
- [Ubuntu CVE Tracker](https://ubuntu.com/security/cves): this is a web
  interface to navigate CVEs, you can filter by Ubuntu versions, and check the
  status of the CVE.
- [CVE git repo](https://git.launchpad.net/ubuntu-cve-tracker/) Canonical
  maintain a public git repo with structured CVE data
- [Ubuntu OVAL](https://ubuntu.com/security/oval) Ubuntu provides vulnerability
  feeds as structured XML file. This contains all CVEs affecting Ubuntu
  releases, both for packages provided in the Image and on other OS components.
- [osv.dev](https://osv.dev) Ubuntu participates in OSV.dev, that provides a
  standardized CVE APIs. However, this is able to provide CVE for packages, not
  general CVEs affecting a certain Ubuntu release, for example affecting the
  kernel.

> The best choice needs to be agreed with a PoCs, this should cover both

Reviewer 2: Since we don't have A/B update for Ubuntu, the only way to fix CVEs is to perform mutable OS update. This will effectively mean that "fixed_cves" in the Ubuntu OS profiles will only be informational and only applied for freshly provisioned ENs. 

I'm ok with that, just making a note that the approach to fix CVEs will be different and in the case of immutable OS we apriori know which CVEs will be fixed, while for mutable OSes it depends on runtime operations made to OS.

Author: Yes, that's true. And that should be the behaviour of fixed CVEs for mutable OS. We can report information only about the image itself, not of CVEs that will be fixed later by upgrading the node.

Author: Added this comment in the proposal

information about existing CVEs and fixed CVEs on a given Ubuntu version. The
work of fetching CVEs for Ubuntu should be done by OSRM, that should fill the
fixed CVEs at OSProfile creation time, and periodically update the existing
CVEs.

### Instance
In the case of Instance CVEs, the information regards the software that runs at
runtime in the Edge Node. For EMT, the CVEs of the runtime software are
effectively the same that affect the linked OS Profile. The `cves` field can
thus be filled automatically with information from the OS Profile for an initial
implementation, while we implement the reporting mechanism on the Edge Node
software. This can be done by Maintenance Manager (MM), when the Platform Update
Agent (PUA) sends its `PlatformUpdateRequest`. At that moment, MM, could fetch
the OSProfile of the given instance, compare `existing_cves` there and update

> the `cves` field of the instance

Reviewer 2: +1 to the approach

For Ubuntu, instead, the CVEs that affect an instance at runtime could be
different from the `existing_cves` of the OSProfile, because new packages can be
installed or upgraded at runtime. For this reason, we need a mechanism to report
the CVEs that affect the runtime software. The Ubuntu OVAL data together with
Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) compliant tools can be used to scan

> and Ubuntu system. This can be implemented in the Platform Update Agent, that

Reviewer 2: Is there any example online how we can achieve that?

Author: Yes, here: https://ubuntu.com/security/oval

Author: Added reference
